16815 authz design (#17094)
CDCgov/prime-reportstream: prime-router/docs/authz/authz-design.md

# Authorization Design

## Requirements
- Okta used to manage access for all users and machines
- Ability to easily add, modify, and remove user permissions
- Data are only accessible by those we trust
- Feature parity with [deprecated design](authz-deprecated-implementation.md)

## Access Token Design

### Scopes
Scopes refer to actions that can be done on certain endpoints. Scopes are requested during the login process. We 
will set up rules in Okta that allow scopes to be requested based on organization membership. A requested scope will 
only be returned given you have the correct group membership.

| Scope       | Actions                                                       | Okta Group              |
|-------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------|

> | super_admin | Anything! (org membership does not matter)                    | ReportStream-SuperAdmin |

Reviewer: I'm confused about Okta Group as shown here? So a User (or App?) can be a member of these groups and in addition there will be groups for each Sender/Receiver Organization, like "CA_PHD"? If this is correct, can we update the claims example that's lower down to show how/where these groups would appear?

Author: You can limit which scopes are available to you via group membership so thats how I thought about it. You can also use regex to limit groups that get added to the `org` claim. We currently limit groups added to the `organization` claim with only groups that start with "DH".

My idea is:
- Add user to correct group for scope
- Add user to correct org group
- Optionally update profile for those that need to directly submit

Reviewer: Okay I think I understand. A follow-up question is: In ### Claims example would the example have "ReportStream-OrgAdmin", or any of the other "scope" groups in the `"org"` attribute?

Author: My thought would be to exclude them via a fancy regex like so:

![Screenshot 2025-01-24 at 1 19 39 PM](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/13aa7aa0-9ef0-4b74-83ad-470f3236a2ec)

| org:write   | Able to update organizations                                  | ReportStream-OrgAdmin   |
| org:read    | Able to access read-only information related to organizations | ReportStream-User       |
| submit      | Able to submit reports                                        | ReportStream-Submit     |

> | elims       | Special `elims` specific actions (see below)                  | ReportStream-Elims      |

Reviewer: Hmm I don't really like the idea of this, it's coupled to a particular customer's use case. Instead we should look to try to understand the use case in a "generic" way. For example, what would a generic name for this scope be? I think there wouldn't be one because its a mishmash to serve a weird edge case? 

I think I would prefer we don't support this and instead force users to create new accounts if they want a particular role for a particular organization? So that means:

If a user has a "scope group" those scopes will apply to all "org groups". If we want a user to have different "scope groups" for different "org groups" that will not be supported and instead a new user account should be created. This makes sense to me because from an organizational perspective that IS a different user. 

For example, if I worked for CDC and Palantir, I would have two different accounts, one for each organization, and if the two companies work closely together and communicate via slack, I could log in to slack with either of my two different accounts and have different permissions depending on what account I am signed in under.

Author: > For example, what would a generic name for this scope be? I think there wouldn't be one because its a mishmash to serve a weird edge case?

We could break it out into something like the following if it would be more clear.
```
submissions
daily-data
```

> If a user has a "scope group" those scopes will apply to all "org groups". If we want a user to have different "scope groups" for different "org groups" that will not be supported and instead a new user account should be created. This makes sense to me because from an organizational perspective that IS a different user.

I'm a little confused on this. Okta groups are serving multiple purposes in this design. The `ReportStream-*` groups serve as a way to show what users are able to request certain scopes. The `org` groups are the more standard `md-phd` type showing what organization your scope will apply to.

Reviewer: Okay I think I figured out at least part of what's not sitting right with me. I think we are actually trying to combine `user/group permissions (scopes)` with `organization settings`. For example: If we want to give CDC_ELIMS organization permission to view NY's daily data page, then that's not a new scope, but a new organization setting (managed in RS settings database), like so:

```
CA_DPH
    - allow-daily-data-access: [CDC_ELIMS]
 ```

Author: Update this section

require different expressions.

examples:
```
"md-phd.full-elr": Only allow to send from md-phd as full-elr
"ca-phd": Allow submitting from any sender under ca-phd
```

1. Update the default user to add an additional profile attribute
<img src="img/submit-attr.png" width="600"/>
<br><br>
2. Add specific values to the user's profile that you want in the access token
<img src="img/user-profile.png" width="600"/>
<br><br>
3. Add a claim referencing the user profile attribute
<img src="img/user-submit.png" width="600"/>
<br><br>

### Claims example

Given the following token claims scenario:
```json
{
  "scp": [
    "openid",
    "email",
    "org:read",
    "submit"
  ],
  "org": [
    "md-phd",
    "ca-phd"
  ],
  "userSubmit": [
    "md-phd.full-elr",
    "ca-phd"  
  ]  
}
```

This particular user would be able to read information about `md-phd` and `ca-phd`. They would also be able to submit 
reports only as `md-phd.full-elr` or for any sender under `ca-phd`. Note that the current implementation uses an 
`organization` claim. This will continue to be present during the transition but will eventually be phased out.

## Setting up a new user

> In this system, setting up a new user would be quite easy. Create the user in Okta and then add it the required 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this system, setting up a new user would be quite easy. Create the user in Okta and then add it to the required 
```

### Difficulty with sender setup
Senders are set up as application users within Okta to allow the machine-to-machine client credentials OAuth 2.0 flow. The 
difficulty arises because while Okta allows you to add application users to groups, it does not allow you to easily add 
those groups to the generated access token JWT. The workaround there is adding the necessary information to the Okta 
application user's profile. This can only be done via API at the moment though.

My suggestion is having a sender setup API and CLI that when given the appropriate values, will set them in the profile.

Here is some psudeocode on what that might look like using the Okta admin SDK. Given this would happen in the `auth` 
project we could easily authorize that the user kicking off this job only be a superadmin.
```kotlin
fun setApplicationProfile(
    clientId: String,
    submit: List<String>
) {
    val application = applicationApi.getApplication(clientId, null)
    val groups = getApplicationGroups(clientId)
    application.putprofileItem("groups", groups)
    application.putprofileItem("appSubmit", submit)
    applicationApi.replaceApplication(arnejAppId, application)
}
```

> We will also need to keep these profiles up to date, therefore, we would need some sort of daily job to check that groups

Reviewer: I think there may be more thinking to do here when we design this CLI (if we decide to go this way). Perhaps the CLI tool doesn't just update the profiles but we also use it to create/update applications as well (so a more full-featured CLI) and don't do anything in the Okta GUI for applications so as to not confused things? Does this sound reasonable/plausible?

Author: I think this is reasonable. I'm fairly certain everything you need to make a new application user is available in the API via the Okta Admin SDK.

Reviewer: TODO/UPDATE: As we discussed, add more detail here on how we can set this up so that "syncing" doesn't need to happen

are correctly synced. It also wouldn't hurt to be able to be able to kick off this job manually during times of
rapid group changes.

## Authorization check

There will have to be multiple approaches to doing the actual authorization check given it will work differently across 
different application frameworks.

### Spring

> In Spring we can leverage method security. This allows us to write custom predicates in SpEL (Spring expression language) 

Reviewer: Note that this only applies to Submission microservice at the moment, right?

- Data are only accessible by those we trust
- Feature parity with [deprecated design](authz-deprecated-implementation.md)

## Access Token Design

### Scopes
Scopes refer to actions that can be done on certain endpoints. Scopes are requested during the login process. We 
will set up rules in Okta that allow scopes to be requested based on organization membership. A requested scope will 
only be returned given you have the correct group membership.

| Scope       | Actions                                                               | Okta Group               |
|-------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------|
| super_admin | Anything! (org membership does not matter)                            | ReportStream-SuperAdmin  |
| org:write   | Able to update organizations                                          | ReportStream-OrgAdmin    |
| org:read    | Able to access read-only information related to organizations         | ReportStream-User        |
| submit      | Able to submit reports                                                | ReportStream-Submit      |

> | submissions | Able to access submissions page                                       | ReportStream-submissions |

Author: No longer required since both covered by `org:read`

This particular user would be able to read information about `md-phd` and `ca-phd`. They would also be able to submit 
reports only as `md-phd.full-elr` or for any sender under `ca-phd`. Note that the current implementation uses an 
`organization` claim. This will continue to be present during the transition but will eventually be phased out.

### Daily Data page special considerations

For specific users within specific organizations, the daily data page will be populated with receiver data from other 
organizations. Since these are organizational level settings which are tightly coupled to Report Stream, we 
would store these settings within the RS Postgres DB.

Example: User within the `elims` organization wants to see the daily data page containing data from receivers within
the `md-phd` and `ca-phd` organizations to check that reports have been properly routed.

Organizational settings:
```yml
md-phd:
  allow-daily-data-access: [elims] # references another organization name

ca-phd:
  allow-daily-data-access: [elims]
```

User token:
```json
{
  "scp": [
    "openid",
    "email",
    "org:write",
    "daily-data"  
  ],
  "org": [
    "elims"
  ]
}
```

At a code level:

> - ensure the user contains the `daily-data` scope

Author: simplify because daily-data page is only 1 receiver at a time

#### How to set up in Okta

1. Create a scope
<img src="img/okta-scope.png" width="600"/>
<br><br>
2. Create an Access Policy
<img src="img/access-policy.png" width="600"/>
<br><br>
3. Add a Rule to the Policy. Ensure you have limited the scope to the group membership.
<img src="img/access-policy-rule.png" width="600"/>
<br><br>
4. Add an additional rule to deny Access to users not in the group. Ensure the default scopes rule is first in priority.
<img src="img/default-access-policy-rule.png" width="600"/>
<br><br>

### Organizations
Organizations are set up as groups within Okta and will be included in the token. The combination of the scopes and 
groups will allow us to make authorization decisions on most endpoints. Organizations are easily added to the token 
for users via the UI. I will delve into how to set it up for senders later in the document.

<img src="img/groups-claim.png" width="600"/>

### Submit claim

There will also be an optional `userSubmit` or `appSubmit` claim containing specific organizations AND optional sender. These values will 
be dot seperated. If a sender is not included it will be assumed to be a wildcard and allow all senders under that 

> organization. Unfortunately the claim names have to seperated as to access the user profile and application user profile 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
organization. Unfortunately the claim names have to be separated as to access the user profile and application user profile 
```

Reviewer: What do you mean by "claim names have to be separated"? You mean userSubmit vs appSubmit?

Author: I meant that a claim name has to be unique and can only have a single expression.

My workaround:
```
appSubmit: app.profile.submit
userSubmit: user.submit
```

I'll clarify in the document.

> require different expressions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
requires different expressions.
```

Reviewer: Also can we elaborate on what "requires different expressions" means or find a way to reword this section?

Author: see above ^

"ca-phd": Allow submitting from any sender under ca-phd
```

1. Update the default user to add an additional profile attribute
<img src="img/submit-attr.png" width="600"/>
<br><br>
2. Add specific values to the user's profile that you want in the access token
<img src="img/user-profile.png" width="600"/>
<br><br>
3. Add a claim referencing the user profile attribute
<img src="img/user-submit.png" width="600"/>
<br><br>

### Claims example

Given the following token claims scenario:
```json
{
  "scp": [
    "openid",
    "email",
    "org:read",
    "submit"
  ],
  "org": [
    "md-phd",
    "ca-phd"
  ],
  "userSubmit": [
    "md-phd.full-elr",
    "ca-phd"  
  ]  
}
```

This particular user would be able to read information about `md-phd` and `ca-phd`. They would also be able to submit 
reports only as `md-phd.full-elr` or for any sender under `ca-phd`. Note that the current implementation uses an 
`organization` claim. This will continue to be present during the transition but will eventually be phased out.

### Daily Data page special considerations

For specific users within specific organizations, we want to allow them to access another organization's daily data 

> page. Since these are organizational level settings that are tightly coupled to Report Stream, we would store these 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
page. Since these are organizational level settings that are tightly coupled to ReportStream, we would store these 
```

> settings within the RS Postgres DB.

Reviewer: As we said, this is probably fine for version 1.0 but it would be good to think on this and if there is a better way to manage and store org settings. For example, does Okta provide any facilities for this?

My suggestion is having a sender setup API and CLI that when given the appropriate values, will set them in the profile.

Here is some psudeocode on what that might look like using the Okta admin SDK. Given this would happen in the `auth` 
project we could easily authorize that the user kicking off this job only be a superadmin.
```kotlin
fun setApplicationProfile(
    clientId: String,
    submit: List<String>
) {
    val application = applicationApi.getApplication(clientId, null)
    val groups = getApplicationGroups(clientId)
    application.putprofileItem("groups", groups)
    application.putprofileItem("appSubmit", submit)
    applicationApi.replaceApplication(arnejAppId, application)
}
```

We could go even further and write various APIs (and potentially CLI calls) that will set up an application user from 
scratch. This would dramatically simplify the process of setting up a sender since we would not need to handle going
back and forth between API and Okta Admin UI and could provide the necessary values needed for a new sender.
We could also reuse our existing authentication and authorization within the project to ensure only specific people are able to 

> hit these endpoints.

Reviewer: Maybe just call out that the next/final step could be to create a GUI in ReportStream where engagement can fill out a form and the app user is correctly created/updated.

        claims["org"].contains(requiredOrg)
    } ?: true
    
    return containsRequiredScope && containsRequiredOrg
}

/**
 * Report submission function check
 * 
 * Check that a user contains the submit claim
 * Check that the client header is contained within the appSubmit/userSubmit claim or starts with it (wildcard scenario)
 *
 * examples:
 * submit: [md-phd]
 * client: md-phd.default
 * outcome: true
 * 
 * submit: [md-phd.default]
 * client: md-phd.default
 * outcome: true
 * 
 * submit: [md-phd.default]
 * client: md-phd
 * outcome: false
 */
fun authorizeSubmit(
    request: HttpRequestMessage,
): Boolean {
    val claims = getClaims(request) // pseudocode to grab the claims
    val containsSubmitScope = claims["scp"].contains("submit")
    val submitClaim = claims["appSubmit"] ?: claims["userSubmit"] ?: emptyList<String>()
    val clientHeader = request.headers["client"]
    
    val canSubmit = submitClaim.any { sender ->
        clientHeader.startsWith(sender) || clientHeader == sender
    }
    
    return containsSubmitScope && canSubmit
}

```

## Deprecated approach to passing groups downstream

> At the time of writing this section (2/5/25), code still exists which is doing the following:

Reviewer: Where is this code? Auth microservice? Also filenames/functions would be helpful.
